Closes #234 Blog Post: How I Rebuilt a Lost ECG Data Script in R (#235)
pharmaverse/blog: posts/zzz_DO_NOT_EDIT_how__i__reb.../how__i__rebuilt_a__lost__ec_g__data__script_in__r.qmd

## How I Solved the Problem

### 1. Explored and Analyzed the Data

The first step was to thoroughly explore the existing ECG dataset of over 25,000 entries. I needed to understand the structure and key variables that defined the dataset, such as the "one row for each patient's test during each visit" format. By analyzing these elements, I was able to gain a clear picture of how the dataset was organized. I also examined the range of values, variance, and other characteristics of the tests to ensure that my recreated version would align with the original dataset's structure and statistical properties.

To provide a clearer understanding of how the data is structured, let’s take a quick look at the information collected during a patient’s visit. Below is an example of data for patient `01-701-1015` during their `WEEK 2` visit:

```{r, eval = T, message = F, echo = F}         
library(dplyr)
library(pharmaversesdtm)

eg %>%
  select(USUBJID, EGTEST, VISIT, EGDTC, EGTPT, EGSTRESC) %>%
  filter(USUBJID == "01-701-1015" & VISIT == "WEEK 2")
```

> In this example, the `EGTPT` column indicates the timing of the test, while `EGTEST` specifies the type of test conducted. The numeric results are recorded in `EGSTRESN`, with the corresponding categorical values in `EGSTRESC`.

Reviewer: Briefly explain what the other variables are

### 2. Wrote the New R Script

Armed with insights from my analysis, I set about writing a new R script to replicate the lost one. This involved a lot of trial and error, as I kept refining the code to ensure it generated a dataset that closely resembled the original ECG data in both structure and content. In order to give you, my reader, better understanding of the solution, I'll walk you through the main parts of the script.

#### Loading Libraries and Data

> To begin, I loaded the necessary libraries and read in the vital signs (`vs`) dataset, which was essential for providing key clinical information about the participants. This data complemented the ECG measurements and allowed for a more comprehensive analysis of each subject's health status during the study. By setting a seed for the random data generation, I ensured that the process was reproducible, allowing others to verify my results and maintain consistency in future analyses. Additionally, the metatools package was loaded to facilitate adding labels to the variables later, which enhanced the readability of the dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To begin, I loaded the necessary libraries and read in the vital signs (`vs`) dataset, This dataset is functional to my cause because it has the same structure and schedule as the `eg` data, so I can recreate the `eg` visit schedule for each patient from it. . By setting a seed for the random data generation, I ensured that the process was reproducible, allowing others to verify my results and maintain consistency in future analyses. Additionally, the metatools package was loaded to facilitate adding labels to the variables later, which enhanced the readability of the dataset.
```

```{r, eval = T, message = F}
library(dplyr)
library(metatools)
library(pharmaversesdtm)

data("vs")
set.seed(123)
```

#### Extracting Unique Date/Time of Measurements

Next, I extracted the unique combination of subject IDs, visit names, and visit dates from the `vs` dataset.

```{r, eval = T}
egdtc <- vs %>%
  select(USUBJID, VISIT, VSDTC) %>%
  distinct() %>%
  rename(EGDTC = VSDTC)

head(egdtc)
```

This data was used later to match the generated ECG data to the correct visit and time points.

#### Generating a Grid of Patient Data

> Here, I created a grid of all possible combinations of subject IDs, test codes (e.g., `QT`, `HR`, `RR`, `ECGINT`), time points (e.g., after lying down, after standing), and visits. These combinations represented different test results collected across multiple visits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subsequently, I created a grid of all possible combinations of subject IDs, test codes (e.g., `QT`, `HR`, `RR`, `ECGINT`), time points (e.g., after lying down, after standing), and visits. These combinations represented different test results collected across multiple visits.
```

(reads better)

```{r, eval = T}
eg <- expand.grid(
  USUBJID = unique(vs$USUBJID),
  EGTESTCD = c("QT", "HR", "RR", "ECGINT"),
  EGTPT = c(
    "AFTER LYING DOWN FOR 5 MINUTES",
    "AFTER STANDING FOR 1 MINUTE",
    "AFTER STANDING FOR 3 MINUTES"
  ),
  VISIT = c(
    "SCREENING 1",
    "SCREENING 2",
    "BASELINE",
    "AMBUL ECG PLACEMENT",
    "WEEK 2",
    "WEEK 4",
    "AMBUL ECG REMOVAL",
    "WEEK 6",
    "WEEK 8",
    "WEEK 12",
    "WEEK 16",
    "WEEK 20",
    "WEEK 24",
    "WEEK 26",
    "RETRIEVAL"
  ), stringsAsFactors = FALSE
)

> head(eg)

Reviewer: displaying `head(eg)` doesn't really show a useful snippet here - please could you revisit this?

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5c2cbbae-7a4b-4005-990c-ea69c868566a)

```

Each of these test codes corresponds to specific ECG measurements: `QT` refers to the QT interval, `HR` represents heart rate, `RR` is the interval between R waves, `ECGINT` refers to the ECG interpretation.

As I analyzed the original ECG dataset, I learned more about these test codes and their relevance to the clinical data.

#### Generating Random Test Results

For each combination in the grid, I generated random test results using a normal distribution to simulate realistic values for each test code. To determine the means and standard deviations, I had used the original EG dataset as a reference. By analyzing the range and distribution of values in the original dataset, I was able to extract realistic means and standard deviations for each numerical ECG test (`QT`, `HR`, `RR`).

``` r

> EGSTRESN = case_when(

Reviewer 2: I would like there to be a word on limitations of this approach, i.e. 
- Time structure is not taken into account for simulations, each observation is simulated as i.i.d.
This is probably fine for this dataset, but not quite realistic. 
Also, drawing from a normal distribution may lead to impossible results, i.e. negative values for HR: would be cool to have some checks for plausible results as well.

EGTESTCD == "RR" & EGELTM == "PT5M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 543.9985, 80)),
EGTESTCD == "RR" & EGELTM == "PT3M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 536.0161, 80)),
EGTESTCD == "RR" & EGELTM == "PT1M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 532.3233, 80)),
EGTESTCD == "HR" & EGELTM == "PT5M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 70.04389, 8)),
EGTESTCD == "HR" & EGELTM == "PT3M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 74.27798, 8)),
EGTESTCD == "HR" & EGELTM == "PT1M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 74.77461, 8)),
EGTESTCD == "QT" & EGELTM == "PT5M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 450.9781, 60)),
EGTESTCD == "QT" & EGELTM == "PT3M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 457.7265, 60)),
EGTESTCD == "QT" & EGELTM == "PT1M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 455.3394, 60))
)
```

This approach allowed me to ensure that the synthetic data aligned closely with the patterns and variability observed in the original clinical data.

#### Finalizing the Dataset

> Finally, I added labels to the dataframe for easier analysis and future use by utilizing the `add_labels` function from the `metatools` package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, I added labels to the dataframe for easier analysis and future use by utilizing the `metatools::add_labels()`.
```

---
title: "How I Rebuilt a Lost ECG Data Script in R"
author:
  - name: Vladyslav Shuliar

> description: "A Data Science placement student shares their experience of rewriting a lost R script to regenerate an essential ECG dataset for the open-source *pharmaversesdtm* project. The post covers their approach to data exploration, identifying key parameters, and overcoming challenges in recreating the dataset from scratch."

Reviewer: Maybe write this in the first person? As your post is also in the first person.

Reviewer: Also please use {curly braces} around package names rather than italics across the whole post.

# Note that the date below will be auto-updated when the post is merged.
date: "2024-09-30"
# Please do not use any non-default categories.
# You can find the default categories in the repository README.md

> categories: [SDTM, Community, Technical]

Reviewer: I'd remove the community tag here.

# Feel free to change the image
image: "pharmaverse.png"

---

<!--------------- typical setup ----------------->

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
long_slug <- "zzz_DO_NOT_EDIT_how__i__reb..."
# renv::use(lockfile = "renv.lock")
```

<!--------------- post begins here ----------------->

# Rebuilding a Lost Script: My Journey into Open-Source Data Science

> As a new Data Science placement student, I was given an exciting opportunity to sharpen my R programming skills while contributing to the open-source community. Under the guidance of my manager, Edoardo Mancini, I took on a unique and challenging task for *pharmaversesdtm*, which tested both my technical know-how and problem-solving abilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a new Data Science placement student at Roche UK, I was given an exciting opportunity to sharpen my R programming skills while contributing to the open-source community. Under the guidance of my manager, Edoardo Mancini, I took on a unique and challenging task within *pharmaversesdtm*, which tested both my technical know-how and problem-solving abilities.
```

## The Challenge: Rewriting a Lost Script

> One of the open-source datasets from CDISC, specifically the Electrocardiogram (ECG) data, had been created by a script that had unfortunately been lost and couldn’t be recovered. This was a major issue because the program used to retrieve and process the ECG data was essential for future work. My task was to write a new R script from scratch to regenerate the ECG dataset—one that closely matched the original in both structure and content.

Reviewer: Improve explanation here: {pharmaversesdtm}'s test SDTM datasets are either:

1.  copies of open-source data made available from the CDISC pilot project (insert link) and prepared for use within the pharmaverse
2. - generated on the fly by developers for use within the pharmaverse.

For `eg`, it's not so much that the script was lost, rather that the source was previously of type 1 but now that dataset is not available anymore and so we had no source file. So the task was to regenerate something similar ourselves so that we had a source file.

Reviewer: Also remove sentence about essentialness.

## My Approach: Reverse-Engineering the Data

> 

Reviewer: Explain: even though we had no source for the `eg` dataset, we still had a copy of it saved, so you could analyse it to understand it contents.

The existing ECG dataset contained over 25,000 entries, and without the original code, I had to manually explore and make sense of the data to understand how it had been generated. Here's how I approached it:

### 1. Data Exploration and Analysis

> I started by thoroughly analysing the available ECG dataset. My goal was to identify patterns, structures, and key variables that were likely involved in creating the original dataset. By digging deep into the data, I could understand how it was organised and what factors were critical to replicate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I started by thoroughly analysing the available `EG` dataset. My goal was to understand structures, and key variables that were likely involved in creating the original dataset. By digging deep into the data, I could understand how it was organised and what factors were critical to replicate.
```

Reviewer: Note: might want to rephrase the above as the original dataset wasn't "created", it was coming from real data. So you were just trying to understand:

- dataset structure (one row per test per visit etc)
- characteristics of the tests (range of values, variance, etc)

in order to replicate it faithfully. 

Maybe give an example here?

> ### 2. Identifying the Parameters

Reviewer: This section reads the same as 1. I would remove.

As I explored the dataset, I focused on identifying which features were crucial for recreating the lost data. By paying close attention to trends and relationships between different variables, I could form a rough idea of how the original script might have worked.

> ### 3. Writing the New R Script

Reviewer: Is this really a step? This is basically the whole task.

Armed with insights from my analysis, I set about writing a new R script to replicate the lost one. This involved a lot of trial and error, as I kept refining the code to ensure it generated a dataset that closely resembled the original ECG data in both structure and content.

## Challenges and Solutions

Working with a dataset of over 25,000 entries brought its own challenges. Making sure the script was efficient and scalable while still producing accurate, high-quality data was a key focus. I used a range of R techniques to streamline the process and make sure the dataset followed the original patterns.

## The Result: A Recreated ECG Dataset

> After days of analysis, coding, and refinement, I successfully wrote an R script that could regenerate the lost ECG dataset. This project not only helped me improve my R programming skills but also gave me valuable experience in reverse-engineering data, exploring large healthcare datasets, and solving practical problems in the open-source world.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After days of analysis, coding, and refinement, I successfully wrote an R script that could regenerate the lost ECG dataset. 
```

I like this sentence but would move to the conclusion

## Main Parts of the Code

> In this section, I’ll walk through the most important pieces of the R script I wrote to recreate the ECG dataset. The code involved generating a set of dummy patient data, complete with visit information and random test results, based on existing patterns from the original dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, I’ll walk through the most important pieces of the R script I wrote to recreate the `EG` dataset. The code involved generating a set of dummy patient data, complete with visit information and random test results, based on existing patterns from the original dataset.
```

### 1. Loading Libraries and Data

> To begin, I load the necessary libraries and read in the vital signs (`vs`) dataset. The seed is set to ensure that the random data generation is reproducible.

Reviewer: Explain here why you need `vs`

```r
library(dplyr)
library(metatools)

data("vs")
set.seed(123)
```

### 2. Extracting Unique Date/Time of Measurements

Next, I extract the unique combination of subject IDs, visit names, and visit dates from the `vs` dataset. This data will be used later to match the generated ECG data to the correct visit and time points.

```r
egdtc <- vs %>%
  select(USUBJID, VISIT, VSDTC) %>%
  distinct() %>%
  rename(EGDTC = VSDTC)
```

> 

Reviewer: Nice! Can we get this code to print out something?

### 3. Generating a Grid of Patient Data

> Here, I create a grid of all possible combinations of subject IDs, test codes (e.g., `QT`, `HR`, `RR`, `ECGINT`), time points (e.g., after lying down, after standing), and visits. These combinations represent different test results across multiple visits.

Reviewer: What are these tests specifically? I think the post should walk the reader through your experience. I assume you learned about these tests through initial analysis of the `EG` dataset.

```r
eg <- expand.grid(
  USUBJID = unique(vs$USUBJID),
  EGTESTCD = c("QT", "HR", "RR", "ECGINT"),
  EGTPT = c("AFTER LYING DOWN FOR 5 MINUTES", "AFTER STANDING FOR 1 MINUTE", "AFTER STANDING FOR 3 MINUTES"),
  VISIT = c(
    "SCREENING 1",
    "SCREENING 2",
    "BASELINE",
    "AMBUL ECG PLACEMENT",
    "WEEK 2",
    "WEEK 4",
    "AMBUL ECG REMOVAL",
    "WEEK 6",
    "WEEK 8",
    "WEEK 12",
    "WEEK 16",
    "WEEK 20",
    "WEEK 24",
    "WEEK 26",
    "RETRIEVAL"
  ), stringsAsFactors = FALSE
)
```

> 

Reviewer: This is nice - again it would be good to print out something, maybe just for one pt?

### 4. Generating Random Test Results

> For each combination in the grid, I generate random test results using a normal distribution to simulate realistic values for each test code.

Reviewer: How did you come up with the mean and SDs?

```r
EGSTRESN = case_when(
      EGTESTCD == "RR" & EGELTM == "PT5M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 543.9985, 80)),
      EGTESTCD == "RR" & EGELTM == "PT3M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 536.0161, 80)),
      EGTESTCD == "RR" & EGELTM == "PT1M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 532.3233, 80)),
      EGTESTCD == "HR" & EGELTM == "PT5M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 70.04389, 8)),
      EGTESTCD == "HR" & EGELTM == "PT3M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 74.27798, 8)),
      EGTESTCD == "HR" & EGELTM == "PT1M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 74.77461, 8)),
      EGTESTCD == "QT" & EGELTM == "PT5M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 450.9781, 60)),
      EGTESTCD == "QT" & EGELTM == "PT3M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 457.7265, 60)),
      EGTESTCD == "QT" & EGELTM == "PT1M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 455.3394, 60))
    )
```

### 5. Finalizing the Dataset

Finally, I'm adding labels to the dataframe for easier analysis and future use.

```r

> add_labels(

Reviewer: what pkg is this function coming from?

    STUDYID = "Study Identifier",
    DOMAIN = "Domain Abbreviation",
    USUBJID = "Unique Subject Identifier",
    EGSEQ = "Sequence Number",
    EGTESTCD = "ECG Test Short Name",
    EGTEST = "ECG Test Name",
    EGORRES = "Result or Finding in Original Units",
    EGORRESU = "Original Units",
    EGELTM = "Elapsed Time",
    EGSTRESC = "Character Result/Finding in Std Format",
    EGSTRESN = "Numeric Result/Finding in Standard Units",
    EGSTRESU = "Standard Units",
    EGSTAT = "Completion Status",
    EGLOC = "Location of Vital Signs Measurement",
    EGBLFL = "Baseline Flag",
    VISITNUM = "Visit Number",
    VISIT = "Visit Name",
    VISITDY = "Planned Study Day of Visit",
    EGDTC = "Date/Time of Measurements",
    EGDY = "Study Day of Vital Signs",
    EGTPT = "Planned Time Point Number",
    EGTPTNUM = "Time Point Number",
    EGELTM = "Planned Elapsed Time from Time Point Ref",
    EGTPTREF = "Time Point Reference"
  )
```

> This structured approach allowed me to successfully recreate the lost ECG dataset, providing a solid foundation for future analysis and research.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This structured approach allowed me to successfully recreate the `EG` synthetically.
```

Reviewer: Maybe add your conclusion section here.

Reviewer: And in the conclusion, also mention this will be avaialble in the next release of pharmaversesdtm. @kaz462 do we have a date here?

---
title: "How I Rebuilt a Lost ECG Data Script in R"
author:
  - name: Vladyslav Shuliar
description: "During my Data Science placement, I faced the challenge of recreating an ECG dataset for the {pharmaversesdtm} project after the original R script was lost. I explored the existing data, identified key parameters, and experimented with R packages to replicate the dataset structure and ensure SDTM compliance. Despite challenges with ensuring accurate ECG measurements, I eventually regenerated the dataset, learning valuable lessons in problem-solving and resilience."
# Note that the date below will be auto-updated when the post is merged.
date: "2024-09-30"
# Please do not use any non-default categories.
# You can find the default categories in the repository README.md
categories: [SDTM, Technical]
# Feel free to change the image
image: "pharmaverse.PNG"
---

<!--------------- typical setup ----------------->

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
long_slug <- "zzz_DO_NOT_EDIT_how__i__reb..."

> # renv::use(lockfile = "renv.lock")

Reviewer 2: Let's add here a library("link") call.
```suggestion
# renv::use(lockfile = "renv.lock")
library("link")
```

```

<!--------------- post begins here ----------------->

As a Data Science placement student at Roche UK, I was given an exciting opportunity to enhance my R programming skills while contributing to the open-source community. Under the guidance of my manager, Edoardo Mancini, I undertook a unique and challenging task within the {pharmaversesdtm} project that tested both my technical expertise and problem-solving abilities.

> The project involved recreating the `eg` domain (Electrocardiogram data) from the SDTM datasets used within {pharmaversesdtm}. The original dataset had been sourced from the <a href="https://github.com/cdisc-org/sdtm-adam-pilot-project" target="_blank">CDISC pilot project</a>, but since that source was no longer available, we had no direct reference. Fortunately, a saved copy of the dataset still existed, allowing me to analyze it and attempt to reproduce it as closely as possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The project involved recreating the `eg` domain (Electrocardiogram data) from the SDTM datasets used within {pharmaversesdtm}. The original dataset had been sourced from the [CDISC pilot project](https://github.com/cdisc-org/sdtm-adam-pilot-project), but since that source was no longer available, we had no direct reference. Fortunately, a saved copy of the dataset still existed, allowing me to analyze it and attempt to reproduce it as closely as possible.
```

```{r, eval = T, message = F, echo = F}         
library(dplyr)
library(pharmaversesdtm)

eg %>%
  select(USUBJID, EGTEST, VISIT, EGDTC, EGTPT, EGSTRESN, EGSTRESC) %>%
  filter(USUBJID == "01-701-1015" & VISIT == "WEEK 2")
```

In this example, `USUBJID` identifies the subject, while `EGTEST` specifies the type of ECG test performed. `VISIT` refers to the visit during which the test occurred, and `EGDTC` records the date of the test. `EGTPT` indicates the condition under which the ECG test was conducted. `EGSTRESN` provides the numeric result, and `EGSTRESC` gives the corresponding categorical result.

### Wrote the New R Script

Armed with insights from my analysis, I set about writing a new R script to replicate the lost one. This involved a lot of trial and error, as I kept refining the code to ensure it generated a dataset that closely resembled the original ECG data in both structure and content. In order to give you, my reader, better understanding of the solution, I'll walk you through the main parts of the script.

#### Loading Libraries and Data

> To begin, I loaded the necessary libraries and read in the vital signs (`vs`) dataset, This dataset is functional to my cause because it has the same structure and schedule as the `eg` data, so I can recreate the `eg` visit schedule for each patient from it. . By setting a seed for the random data generation, I ensured that the process was reproducible, allowing others to verify my results and maintain consistency in future analyses. Additionally, the metatools package was loaded to facilitate adding labels to the variables later, which enhanced the readability of the dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To begin, I loaded the necessary libraries and read in the vital signs (`vs`) dataset, This dataset is functional to my cause because it has the same structure and schedule as the `eg` data, so I can recreate the `eg` visit schedule for each patient from it. By setting a seed for the random data generation, I ensured that the process was reproducible, allowing others to verify my results and maintain consistency in future analyses. Additionally, the metatools package was loaded to facilitate adding labels to the variables later, which enhanced the readability of the dataset.
```

  distinct() %>%
  rename(EGDTC = VSDTC)

egdtc
```

This data was used later to match the generated ECG data to the correct visit and time points.

#### Generating a Grid of Patient Data

Subsequently, I created a grid of all possible combinations of subject IDs, test codes (e.g., `QT`, `HR`, `RR`, `ECGINT`), time points (e.g., after lying down, after standing), and visits. These combinations represented different test results collected across multiple visits.

```{r, eval = T}
eg <- expand.grid(
  USUBJID = unique(vs$USUBJID),
  EGTESTCD = c("QT", "HR", "RR", "ECGINT"),
  EGTPT = c(
    "AFTER LYING DOWN FOR 5 MINUTES",
    "AFTER STANDING FOR 1 MINUTE",
    "AFTER STANDING FOR 3 MINUTES"
  ),
  VISIT = c(
    "SCREENING 1",
    "SCREENING 2",
    "BASELINE",
    "AMBUL ECG PLACEMENT",
    "WEEK 2",
    "WEEK 4",
    "AMBUL ECG REMOVAL",
    "WEEK 6",
    "WEEK 8",
    "WEEK 12",
    "WEEK 16",
    "WEEK 20",
    "WEEK 24",
    "WEEK 26",
    "RETRIEVAL"
  ), stringsAsFactors = FALSE
)

# Filter the dataset for one subject and one visit
filtered_eg <- eg %>%
  filter(USUBJID == "01-701-1015" & VISIT == "WEEK 2")

# Display the result
filtered_eg
```

> In order to demonstrate the data more clearly, I have displayed the combinations for only one subject and one visit for you to see, as the full table is very large. Each of these test codes corresponds to specific ECG measurements: `QT` refers to the QT interval, `HR` represents heart rate, `RR` is the interval between R waves, and `ECGINT` refers to the ECG interpretation.

Reviewer 2: What is the QT interval?

#### Generating Random Test Results

For each combination in the grid, I generated random test results using a normal distribution to simulate realistic values for each test code. To determine the means and standard deviations, I used the original EG dataset as a reference. By analyzing the range and distribution of values in the original dataset, I was able to extract realistic means and standard deviations for each numerical ECG test (`QT`, `HR`, `RR`). 

``` r
EGSTRESN = case_when(
EGTESTCD == "RR" & EGELTM == "PT5M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 543.9985, 80)),
EGTESTCD == "RR" & EGELTM == "PT3M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 536.0161, 80)),
EGTESTCD == "RR" & EGELTM == "PT1M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 532.3233, 80)),
EGTESTCD == "HR" & EGELTM == "PT5M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 70.04389, 8)),
EGTESTCD == "HR" & EGELTM == "PT3M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 74.27798, 8)),
EGTESTCD == "HR" & EGELTM == "PT1M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 74.77461, 8)),
EGTESTCD == "QT" & EGELTM == "PT5M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 450.9781, 60)),
EGTESTCD == "QT" & EGELTM == "PT3M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 457.7265, 60)),
EGTESTCD == "QT" & EGELTM == "PT1M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 455.3394, 60))
)
```

> This approach allowed me to ensure that the synthetic data aligned closely with the patterns and variability observed in the original clinical data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach ensured that the synthetic data aligned closely with the patterns and variability observed in the original clinical data.
```

#### Finalizing the Dataset

> Finally, I added labels to the dataframe for easier analysis and future use by utilizing the `metatools::add_labels()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, I added labels to the dataframe for easier analysis and future use by utilizing the `metatools::add_labels()` function.
```

``` r
add_labels(
STUDYID = "Study Identifier",
USUBJID = "Unique Subject Identifier",
EGTEST = "ECG Test Name",
VISIT = "Visit Name",
EGSTRESC = "Character Result/Finding in Std Format",
EGSTRESN = "Numeric Result/Finding in Standard Units",
<etc>
)
```

This provided descriptive names for each column in the dataset, making it more intuitive to understand the data during analysis and ensuring clarity in its subsequent use.

#### Limitations

> However, this approach has certain limitations. One key issue is that the simulations do not account for the time structure, as each observation is generated independently (i.i.d.), which may not fully reflect real-world dynamics. Additionally, sampling from a normal distribution can sometimes yield unrealistic results, such as negative heart rate (HR) values. To mitigate this, I manually reviewed the generated data to ensure that only plausible values were included. Below are the valid ranges I established for this purpose:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, this approach has certain limitations. One key issue is that the simulations do not account for the time structure, as each observation is generated independently (i.i.d.), which does not reflect real-world dynamics. Additionally, sampling from a normal distribution may not always be appropriate and can sometimes yield unrealistic results, such as negative heart rate (HR) values. To mitigate this, I manually reviewed the generated data to ensure that only plausible values were included. Below are the valid ranges I established for this purpose:
```

## The Challenge: Rewriting a Lost Script

One of the open-source datasets from CDISC, specifically the Electrocardiogram (ECG) data, had been created by a script that was unfortunately lost and couldn’t be recovered. My task was to write a new R script from scratch to regenerate the ECG dataset, closely matching the original in structure and content.

The {pharmaversesdtm} test SDTM datasets are typically either copies of open-source data from the CDISC pilot project or generated by developers for use within the pharmaverse. In this case, the original ECG dataset came from the CDISC pilot, but since that source was no longer available, we had no file to reference. Fortunately, we still had a saved copy of the dataset, which I was able to analyze. By studying its structure and variables, I could better understand its contents and recreate a similar dataset for ongoing use.

## My Approach: Reverse-Engineering the Data

The existing ECG dataset contained over 25,000 entries, and without the original code, I had to manually explore and make sense of the data to understand how it had been generated. Here's how I approached it:

### 1. Data Exploration and Analysis

> I started by thoroughly analyzing the available `EG` dataset. My goal was to understand the structure and key variables involved in the original dataset. By digging deep into the data, I gained insights into how it was organized, such as having one row per test per visit. I also examined the characteristics of the tests, including the range of values and variance, to ensure that I could replicate the dataset faithfully. This understanding was crucial for generating a new dataset that closely mirrored the original.

Reviewer: Wonder if here you could show an excerpt of the eg dataset? Limited to one patient, a couple of tests, and keep only USUBJID, VISIT, EGTPT EGTEST, EGSTRESN, EGSTRESC.

### 2. Writing the New R Script
Armed with insights from my analysis, I set about writing a new R script to replicate the lost one. This involved a lot of trial and error, as I kept refining the code to ensure it generated a dataset that closely resembled the original ECG data in both structure and content.

## Challenges and Solutions

Working with a dataset of over 25,000 entries brought its own challenges. Making sure the script was efficient and scalable while still producing accurate, high-quality data was a key focus. I used a range of R techniques to streamline the process and make sure the dataset followed the original patterns.

## The Result: A Recreated ECG Dataset

After days of analysis, coding, and refinement, I successfully wrote an R script that could regenerate the lost ECG dataset.

## Main Parts of the Code

In this section, I’ll walk through the most important pieces of the R script I wrote to recreate the `EG` dataset. The code involved generating a set of dummy patient data, complete with visit information and random test results, based on existing patterns from the original dataset.

### 1. Loading Libraries and Data

> To begin, I load the necessary libraries and read in the vital signs (`vs`) dataset. The vs dataset is essential for providing key clinical information about the participants. This data complements the ECG measurements and allows for a more comprehensive analysis of each subject’s health status during the study. By setting a seed for the random data generation, I ensure that the process is reproducible, allowing others to verify my results and maintain consistency in future analyses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To begin, I load the necessary libraries and read in the vital signs (`vs`) dataset. The `vs` dataset is essential for providing key clinical information about the participants. This data complements the ECG measurements and allows for a more comprehensive analysis of each subject's health status during the study. By setting a seed for the random data generation, I ensure that the process is reproducible, allowing others to verify my results and maintain consistency in future analyses.
```

```r
library(dplyr)

> library(metatools)

Reviewer: give a heads up as to why you need metatools (used for labels later?)

data("vs")
set.seed(123)
```

### 2. Extracting Unique Date/Time of Measurements

Next, I extract the unique combination of subject IDs, visit names, and visit dates from the `vs` dataset. This data will be used later to match the generated ECG data to the correct visit and time points.

> ```r

Reviewer: if you set `eval = TRUE` in this chunk then it will just print out the result at the end, so that you don't need to copy the output below

egdtc <- vs %>%
  select(USUBJID, VISIT, VSDTC) %>%
  distinct() %>%
  rename(EGDTC = VSDTC)
```

The output:

```
USUBJID     VISIT               EGDTC     
  <chr>       <chr>               <chr>     
1 01-701-1015 SCREENING 1         2013-12-26
2 01-701-1015 SCREENING 2         2013-12-31
3 01-701-1015 BASELINE            2014-01-02
4 01-701-1015 AMBUL ECG PLACEMENT 2014-01-14
5 01-701-1015 WEEK 2              2014-01-16
6 01-701-1015 WEEK 4              2014-01-30
```

### 3. Generating a Grid of Patient Data

Here, I create a grid of all possible combinations of subject IDs, test codes (e.g., `QT`, `HR`, `RR`, `ECGINT`), time points (e.g., after lying down, after standing), and visits. These combinations represent different test results collected across multiple visits.

Each of these test codes corresponds to specific ECG measurements: 
- `QT` refers to the QT interval, which measures the time between the start of the Q wave and the end of the T wave in the heart's electrical cycle.
- `HR` represents heart rate.
- `RR` is the interval between R waves, typically measuring the time between heartbeats.
- `ECGINT` covers other general ECG interpretations.

> As I analyzed the original ECG dataset, I learned about these test codes and their relevance to the clinical data. This analysis helped me understand how different visits and time points corresponded to various test results, and why it was important to regenerate all these combinations for accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As I analyzed the original ECG dataset, I learned about these test codes and their relevance to the clinical data..
```

For readability also consider moving this sentence to before the list, to explain why you selected those tests.

> ```r

Reviewer: again consider using `eval=T` so that you don't need to print out the output

eg <- expand.grid(
  USUBJID = unique(vs$USUBJID),
  EGTESTCD = c("QT", "HR", "RR", "ECGINT"),
  EGTPT = c("AFTER LYING DOWN FOR 5 MINUTES", "AFTER STANDING FOR 1 MINUTE", "AFTER STANDING FOR 3 MINUTES"),
  VISIT = c(
    "SCREENING 1",
    "SCREENING 2",
    "BASELINE",
    "AMBUL ECG PLACEMENT",
    "WEEK 2",
    "WEEK 4",
    "AMBUL ECG REMOVAL",
    "WEEK 6",
    "WEEK 8",
    "WEEK 12",
    "WEEK 16",
    "WEEK 20",
    "WEEK 24",
    "WEEK 26",
    "RETRIEVAL"
  ), stringsAsFactors = FALSE
)
```

The output:

```
      USUBJID EGTESTCD                          EGTPT       VISIT
1 01-701-1015       QT AFTER LYING DOWN FOR 5 MINUTES SCREENING 1
2 01-701-1015       HR AFTER LYING DOWN FOR 5 MINUTES SCREENING 1
3 01-701-1015       RR AFTER LYING DOWN FOR 5 MINUTES SCREENING 1
4 01-701-1015   ECGINT AFTER LYING DOWN FOR 5 MINUTES SCREENING 1
5 01-701-1015       QT    AFTER STANDING FOR 1 MINUTE SCREENING 1
6 01-701-1015       HR    AFTER STANDING FOR 1 MINUTE SCREENING 1
```

### 4. Generating Random Test Results

> For each combination in the grid, I generate random test results using a normal distribution to simulate realistic values for each test code. To determine the means and standard deviations, I used the original EG dataset as a reference. By analyzing the range and distribution of values in the original dataset, I could extract realistic means and standard deviations for each ECG test (e.g., QT, HR, RR, ECGINT). This approach allowed me to ensure that the synthetic data aligned closely with the patterns and variability observed in the original clinical data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each combination in the grid, I generated random test results using a normal distribution to simulate realistic values for each test code. To determine the means and standard deviations, I used the original EG dataset as a reference. By analyzing the range and distribution of values in the original dataset, I could extract realistic means and standard deviations for each ECG test (e.g., QT, HR, RR, ECGINT). This approach allowed me to ensure that the synthetic data aligned closely with the patterns and variability observed in the original clinical data.
```

> For each combination in the grid, I generate random test results using a normal distribution to simulate realistic values for each test code. To determine the means and standard deviations, I used the original EG dataset as a reference. By analyzing the range and distribution of values in the original dataset, I could extract realistic means and standard deviations for each ECG test (e.g., QT, HR, RR, ECGINT). This approach allowed me to ensure that the synthetic data aligned closely with the patterns and variability observed in the original clinical data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each combination in the grid, I generate random test results using a normal distribution to simulate realistic values for each test code. To determine the means and standard deviations, I used the original EG dataset as a reference. By analyzing the range and distribution of values in the original dataset, I could extract realistic means and standard deviations for each ECG test (`QT`, `HR`, `RR`, `ECGINT`). This approach allowed me to ensure that the synthetic data aligned closely with the patterns and variability observed in the original clinical data.
```

```r
EGSTRESN = case_when(
      EGTESTCD == "RR" & EGELTM == "PT5M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 543.9985, 80)),
      EGTESTCD == "RR" & EGELTM == "PT3M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 536.0161, 80)),
      EGTESTCD == "RR" & EGELTM == "PT1M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 532.3233, 80)),
      EGTESTCD == "HR" & EGELTM == "PT5M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 70.04389, 8)),
      EGTESTCD == "HR" & EGELTM == "PT3M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 74.27798, 8)),
      EGTESTCD == "HR" & EGELTM == "PT1M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 74.77461, 8)),
      EGTESTCD == "QT" & EGELTM == "PT5M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 450.9781, 60)),
      EGTESTCD == "QT" & EGELTM == "PT3M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 457.7265, 60)),
      EGTESTCD == "QT" & EGELTM == "PT1M" ~ floor(rnorm(n(), 455.3394, 60))
    )
```

### 5. Finalizing the Dataset

> Finally, I'm adding labels to the dataframe for easier analysis and future use by utilizing the add_labels function from the metatools package. This helps to provide descriptive names for each column in the dataset, making it more intuitive to understand the data during analysis and ensuring clarity in subsequent use.

Reviewer: This sentence is in the present tense but the rest is in the past - consider switching to past tense
